<speak>
<prosody rate="slow">

We are going to show you how back-testing a trading system works.

Go ahead and open the Excel spreadsheet 'dfP-moving-average-crossover-simple-dot-xlsx.'

Go ahead and open the worksheet entitled 'Steps.'
Here we see the steps of a trading system.
These steps are:
Number 1: we are going to do some data downloading and pre-processing.
In fact, you will see that 
the data is already downloaded onto the next worksheet of this spreadsheet, and
The data is from yahoo finance.
Number 2: we are going to do some signal engineering.
That is, we are going to generate a number signal that is either categorical or continuous.
Number 3: we are going to do a trading rule enunciation.
Here we are going to decide when to buy and when to sell based on the signal in step 2.
We decide whether we buy when the signal goes up 
(because our trading system is trend following), or
we sell when the signal goes up (because our trading system is contrarian).
Number 4: we are going to do a stance calculation.
Here we are going to decide exactly how many contracts to buy or sell.
Number 5: we are going to do a system return calculation.
Here we are going to calculate the returns of the daily trading operations.
Number 6: we are going to do an equity curve calculation.
Here we are going to cumulate the daily returns, so as 
to obtain an equity curve of the trading system returns over a long interval of time.
Number 7: we are going to do some first-level evaluation metrics.
We are going to use the returns and cumulated returns
to graph and summarize the financial performance of our trading system.
There exist many financial summary metrics.
Here we calculate a few, such as the annual return, the CAGR, and the SHARPE ratio.
Number 8: we are going to do a second-level evaluation metric.
We are going to use the returns of our trading system
to summarize the statistical performance of our trading system,
in a robust way, by using a bootstrap method such as,
White's reality check.

Go ahead and open the worksheet called 'trading percent returns.'
In this worksheet we implement a trading system, and
do the calculations using percent returns, whereas
in the worksheet called 'Trading log returns,'
we implement the exact same trading system, and
do the calculations using log returns, so
you can see how to do the calculations in both types of returns.

So, returning to the worksheet called 'Trading percent returns,'
the trading system we implement here,
is called a 'moving average cross-over' trading system, because
the signal is based on an indicator called a 'moving average cross-over' indicator.

The logic of this worksheet is as follows:
As you move from left to right,
each column performs a required calculation for the trading system, 
a calculation that reflects
each one of the 7 steps of the trading system you saw already, one by one.
On the other hand,
as you move down the worksheet,
you see on the leftmost column a date,
and the date is increasing by the row,
from January 3, 2000 to December 31, 2018, in daily steps.
So the rows are data samples ordered by date, and
time moves forward as we move down.

So going back to the top rows of the worksheet,
the first columns, from column A to column G,
consist of data that has been downloaded from yahoo finance.
The data is the price and volume data of the S-P-Y ETF.
An ETF is an "exchange traded," passive, "indexed fund" that is indexed to some well-known index such as O-E-X or S and P 500.
And is listed as a single stock in an exchange using a ticker symbol.
The S-P-Y ETF is indexed to the S and P 500 index,
an index of notable 500 U.S. companies, and
the S-P-Y are the letters that make up its ticker, or identifier,
with which the ETF is listed on the exchange.
So the S-P-Y ETF is just a portfolio of S and P 500 stocks that 
is traded just like any single stock.

You see here the column entitled 'Open,'
which contains the first price at the opening of the NYSE exchange at 9:30 AM.
You see the column entitled 'High,'
which contains the highest price arrived at that day.
You see the column entitled 'Low,'
which contains the lowest price arrived at that day.
You see the column entitled 'Close,'
which contains the last price at the closing of the NYSE exchange at 4:30 PM.
You see the column 'Adj close' which stands for adjusted close,
which is the close price plus dividends, splits, and other relevant cash flows.
You see the column entitled 'Volume,'
which contains the number of S-P-Y stocks traded at the exchange that day.

In this course, 
we make no distinction between close and adjusted close, and
we use either of them in our signal and return calculations, but
the correct way is to use the close for signal calculations, and
to use the adjusted close for exact returns calculations, if you desire, although
it is also possible to use the close price for conservative returns calculations.

When using the adjusted close,
you need to accommodate for the fact that
every day yahoo finance re-calculates the entire adjusted close series 
of every stock
starting from day one to today, in order
to incorporate special cash flows, and so,
the prices in the adjusted close column 
can vary depending on the date of the download of the data, and
this can be very confusing, unless you are aware.

The open, high, low, close, and volume numbers,
are also known as O-H-L-C-V data.
On the other hand, the open, high, low, and close prices,
are also known as a price bar.
You can select the first price bar by selecting row 3, columns A to E.

Go ahead and open the worksheet entitled 'Price Bar.'
Here we see how a price bar is usually represented.
The horizontal axis is time.
The vertical axis is price.
A single bar price is for a single day, because
we have daily data.
The open and the close are indicated by left and right-oriented dashes on the bar, whereas
the high and the low are indicated by the upper and lower bar limits.

So go ahead and return to the worksheet entitled 'Trading percent returns.'
Having looked at the downloaded data in columns A to G,
which contain step 1 of our steps in a trading system,
let us look at columns H to J.

These three columns execute step 2 of our trading system steps; namely,
signal engineering.

Columns H and I contain two trading indicators that
we calculated using close prices.
Column H, entitled 'Short M-A,' is a short-moving average indicator.
The lookback window length of the indicator is in cell H1, and is equal to 42 days.
Column I, entitled 'Long M-A,' is a long-moving average indicator.
The lookback window length of the indicator is in cell I1, and is equal to 252 days.
What is a moving average?

Go ahead, and open the worksheet entitled 'MA, or moving average.'
A moving average is an average that is calculated over a sliding window.
For example, we are going to base our moving average on the close in column A.
To calculate a 3-day moving average, we go to column B, and open cell B4.
Cell B4 contains the average calculated over the close prices of the last 3 days, from cell A2 to cell A4.
Cell B5 contains the average calculated over the close prices of the last 3 days, from cell A3 to cell A5.
Cell B6 contains the average calculated over the close prices of the last 3 days, from cell A4 to cell A6.
And so on.
Similarly,
To calculate a 4-day moving average we go to column C, and open cell C5.
Cell C5 contains the average calculated over the close prices of the last 4 days, from cell A2 to cell A5.
Cell C6 contains the average calculated over the close prices of the last 4 days, from cell A3 to cell A6.
Cell C7 contains the average calculated over the close prices of the last 4 days, from cell A4 to cell A7.
and so on.

Go ahead and return to the worksheet entitled 'Trading percent returns.'
Let us focus on column J, entitled 'Short moving minus long moving average.' 
It calculates a signal which 
is the difference of subtracting the long moving average from the short moving average.
This difference is our engineered signal, the endpoint of step 2 in our trading system steps.
This signal is also called a 'moving average cross-over indicator.' 
This signal is used for step 3 of our trading system steps; namely,
the trading rule enunciation, where
we decide when to buy and when to sell.

Open once more the worksheet entitled 'Moving average, or M-A.'
Focus on the chart.
This chart has time on the horizontal axis, and price on the vertical axis.
This chart graphs the close price as a line colored blue.
It graphs the short moving average as a line colored red.
It graphs the long moving average as a line colored green.
Note how the short-moving average colored red hugs the blue price line pretty closely.
Note how the green long moving average follows the trend of the blue prices, but
does not follow them too closely, unlike the red short moving average.

We state the trading rule in two parts as follows:
First part:
Hold a long position in the S-P-Y when the red line is over the green line.
During this time the "moving average cross-over" indicator is positive (above zero).

Second part:
Hold a short position in the S-P-Y when the red line is under the green line.
During this time the "moving average cross-over" indicator is negative (below zero).

So at the trading rule calculation step, we are saying:
When our indicator is positive (because prices have been increasing) we adopt a long position,
when our indicator is negative (because prices have been decreasing), we adopt a short position.
So this is a trend following trading system.
We have indicated right above the time axis, using curly brackets, from left to right,
the interval of the short position, and then, the interval of the long position.

Step 4 in our trading system steps is the stance calculation.
We state that:
A long position is defined as holding a single long contract, represented as a position=1.
A short position is defined as holding a single short contract equal to negative 1, represented as a position= negative 1.
Holding no position (e.g. after liquidation) is represented as a position=0.

To effectuate this stance calculation, you have to buy or sell contracts of the S-P-Y ETF
every time the red line crosses over or crosses under the green line, 
(This is why this trading system is called a "moving average cross-over" system).
Every time the red line crosses over the green line, 
we liquidate for cash whatever contracts we had on-hand, and immediately buy 1 S-P-Y contract,
every time the red line crosses under the green line,
we liquidate for cash whatever contracts we had on-hand, and immediately sell 1 S-P-Y contract.

Go ahead and return the worksheet entitled 'Trading percent returns.'
Focus on column L entitled 'Stance', go down to cell L255.
Here we calculate the first short position (-1) based on the negative value of column J (the moving average cross-over indicator).
Now go to L851.
Here we calculate the first long position (+1) based on the positive value of column J (the moving average cross-over indicator).
Have a look at the stance column, column L, and
verify that the stance changes position from 0 to 1 to -1 rather seldom.
This finishes step 4 of our trading system steps, the stance calculation.

Going on to step 5 of our trading system steps, the system returns calculation.
Focus on column M, entitled 'Trading system percent returns.'
The calculations of column M are based on the stance calculation in column L, and
on the 'market percent returns' in column K, where
by 'market' we mean the stock we are trading.
We have already looked at the stance calculation in column L.
Let us look at the 'market percent returns' in column K, going on to cell K4.
Here we see how to calculate a percent return based on column E, the close price:
it is just today's close price minus yesterday's close price, that difference divided by yesterday's close price.
Focus again in column M, going to cell M256.
Here we see that 
to calculate today's trading system percent return,
you have to:
multiply the day's stance by the next day's market percent return.
The reason is that the trading system has to take a position at time t, and 
then the trading system realizes the return during the next t plus 24 hours.
So what happened in cell M256 is that 
the position adopted the day before was short (-1); that is, 
the trading system was predicting that the stock would go down, but
the stock went up (experiencing a positive return), and so as a result,
the trading system got penalized in cell M256 with a negative return.
However in cell M257, 
the position adopted the day before continues short (-1); that is, 
the trading system continues to predict that the stock will go down, and
the stock does go down (experiencing a negative return), and so as a result,
the trading system gets rewarded in cell M257 with a positive return.

Step 6 in our trading system steps is the equity curve calculation.
This involves calculating two equity curves,
the equity curve of the trading system,
and the equity curve of the stock (which we calculate so we can compare the two).

We begin with the equity curve calculation of the trading system.
The equity curve of the trading system is the trading system's bank account balance,
if that balance is going up, then 
the trading system is doing well, which 
is what we want.

The equity curve calculation is a cumulation of the returns over time.
The cumulation of percent returns is done in two steps.
First, we add 1 to the trading system percent returns.
We do this in column N, entitled "Add 1."
This turns the percent returns into factors that we can multiply cumulatively, as
is required by the cumulative percent return formula.
Second,
focusing on column O, entitled "Trading system cumulative returns,"
go to cell O4.
Note that here we use the product function to multiply the first return factor,
ignore the rest of the formula for now,
go down to cell O5.
Note that here we use the product function to multiply the first two return factors,
go down to cell O6.
Note that here we use the product function to multiply the first three return factors, and so on.
Stay in cell O6.
Now, let us look at the rest of the formula in cell O6.
Note that after the product function, we subtract a 1; that is, we have a "minus 1".
Why?
Because we added a 1 to the percent returns, to create the return factors, and
now, we have to get rid of the 1.
So basically the rule for percent return cumulation is that
you first add a 1, and 
then you get rid of that 1.
What about the final 1, this "plus 1," at the end of the formula in cell O6?
This final 1 is optional.
The reason people add this final one is that
when graphing the cumulative returns,
people want that graph to start at 1.
Why?
Because we want to be able to say that 
our initial investment in the trading system was 1 dollar.
This is why we put a 1 at the beginning of column O, in cell O3.

By the way, all the financial formulas used in this worksheet, 
come from a list of formulas that
you can consult in a spreadsheet called "Returns.xlsx," 
included with the materials for this video.
In particular, the cumulative returns formula for percent returns, 
is in the worksheet called "Formulas,"
in column B, 
corresponding to the formulas pertaining to percent returns,
in row 5, 
so cell B5.

To finish step 5:
Next, we want to calculate the equity curve of the stock, 
that is, the cumulative returns of the stock,
so as to be able to compare 
the trading system equity curve, and 
the stock equity curve.

So going on to column Q entitled "Market cumulative returns", where 
by "market" we mean the stock we are trading.
Open cell Q4, and look at the formula there.
The formula is the same as the formula in O4; that is,
the formula is using the product function 
to cumulatively multiply the market return factors in column P, where
we already added a 1 to the market percent returns, and, after that,
it is getting rid of the 1 by subtraction, and, after that,
it is adding the final optional 1.
So column Q like column O also starts with a 1, which
you can see in Q3.

The equity curve of the market is also called the "buy and hold" curve.
It is the same curve as the curve of the close prices, but 
it starts at one.
To see this,
go ahead and move left to column A,
and then move down to row 29, where
we show you a chart containing the graph of two curves.
In this chart, the horizontal axis is time.
There are two vertical axes:
the one on the left contains the close price levels,
the one on the right contains the buy and hold levels.
Of the two graphs, 
the one colored blue, draws the close prices.
The one colored red, draws the buy and hold levels.
The blue graph starts at 1455, as shown on the left vertical axis, because
that is where the close price levels start.
On the other hand, 
the red graph starts at 1, as shown on the right vertical axis, because
that is where the buy-and-hold levels start.
So the two graphs, the red and the blue, are basically the same graph,
they just have different vertical axes and starting points.


We still have not compared the trading system's cumulative returns
with the stock cumulative returns.
So let us do that now.
Move up the rows and then move to cell Q1.
The trading system cumulative returns are in column O, starting with a 1, in O3.
The market cumulative returns are in column Q, starting with a 1, in Q3.
To see the graph of these two columns, 
move to the right to column A-E.

So now we are in column A-E, at the top row.
Here you will find a chart that plots the two curves both starting at 1.
The one in blue draws the equity curve of the trading system.
The one in red draws the buy-and-hold curve of the market, which is our stock.
And the whole point of the comparison is to enable us to see if
our trading system strategy beat the buy and hold strategy or not, which
it appears to have done in this case for the most part.
This comparison gives us a lot of information about the trading system, which
is why it is essential to graph it.
For example, the comparison tells us that 
the performance of the trading system is very choppy, 
choppier than that of the stock, which is not good.

Having finished the equity curve calculation step (step 6) of the trading system steps,
let us move on to step 7, 
the calculation of first-level evaluation metrics such as:
the annual return, the CAGR, and the Sharpe ratio.

It is possible and convenient 
to summarize the content of the equity curve chart we just discussed in a few numbers.
Let us do that now.
So go ahead and locate column V, entitled "Annual return."
This is the annual return of the trading system.
Open cell V3 to look at the formula.
It says, ending balance minus starting balance,
this difference is divided by the starting balance, which 
gives us a ratio, and, then,
this ratio is divided by the number of years to annualize it, and, finally,
the result is multiplied by 100.
You can move left to take a peek at column O, to look at what the formula is referring to.

Moving on to column X entitled "CAGR,"
which stands for "Compound annualized growth rate."
This is the annualized average rate of revenue growth 
between two given years, 
assuming growth takes place at an exponentially compounded rate.
The CAGR tells us more about the profitability of the trading system.
Open cell X3 and look at the formula.
It is calculated as 
a ratio of the ending balance over the starting balance, 
this ratio is then raised to the inverse of the number of years (to annualize it), and, then,
subtract a 1, and, then, finally,
the result is multiplied by 100.
Again, you can find this financial formula 
in cell B32 of the worksheet Formulas of the spreadsheet Returns.xlsx.
You can move left to take a peek at column O, to look at what the formula is referring to.

This particular CAGR formula in terms of ending balance and final balance may not be very intuitive.
The Formulas worksheet of the Returns.xlsx spreadsheet shows that 
there are many equivalent ways to calculate CAGR.
The most intuitive formula in our opinion is B33 which says that
the CAGR is just the geometric mean of the percent return factors
(the factors we got by adding 1 to the percent returns.)

The "Annual return," and CAGR formulas tell us something 
about the growth of the profits generated by our trading system, but
not about the risks the trading system took while 
growing those profits.

So go ahead and move to column W entitled "Sharpe" referring to Sharpe ratio.
The Sharpe ratio is the return to risk formula that 
measures the number of standard deviations of profit gained per number of standard deviations risked.
Open cell W3.
Here we see the formula: take the average of column M which
has the raw percent returns of the trading system, and
divide that number by the standard deviation of those same returns.
After that, multiply the number by the square root of 360, which
is an annualization factor that
depends on the accounting calendar being used, 
360 days or 365 days or 252 days (since there are 252 trading days in a year.)
Again, you can find this formula in B29 of the Formulas worksheet of the Returns.xlsx spreadsheet.

An important question is:
What is a desirable Sharpe ratio?
It should be close to, or above, 1 to be good.
The Sharpe ratio we got here in W3 was worthless.

The Sharpe ratio is a classic measure that is the best known but
it can be unstable for machine learning purposes because 
the Sharpe ratio obtained for training data
tends to not carry over to the test data.
Instead of the Sharpe ratio, for your final project,
you could consider the Profit factor which
is more stable.
The Profit factor appears in column AC entitled "Profit factor."
Open cell AC3.
Here we see the formula for the Profit factor, which is 
the ratio of the cumulated wins over the cumulated absolute losses.
What is a desirable Profit factor?
It should be close to, or above, 1.4 to be good.
The Profit factor we got here in W3 was worthless.

Step 8 of the trading system steps is the calculation of second-level evaluation metrics.
This is the last step, but we will save it for later because 
we calculate it in a separate Python script and not in this spreadsheet.

So far we have shown you the application of the steps of a trading system
to a single corpus of data.
However, the trading system is usually applied twice,
once to a training corpus of data, and
a second time to a testing corpus of data, that 
is usually dated to be later in the year than the training data.

When the trading system is applied to the training data,
the objective is to optimize the signals pertaining to step 2.
So go ahead and move to the left, to columns H and I, that
contain our short and long moving averages.
How do you optimize these moving averages?
For example, consider the short-moving average.
It has a parameter, namely the length of the window in H1.
We can try various values of this window length, while
observing the impact on the Sharpe ratio, and, 
finally, keeping the length that makes the Sharpe ratio as close to 1 as possible.
If we change H1 to 3, let us do so now,
the Sharpe ratio in column W goes down to 0.22.
Let us go ahead and check this.
Returning to columns H and I:
If we change H1 to 42, the Sharpe ratio in column W goes up to 0.51, so
we keep 42 as the window length of the short-moving average, as
it is the optimal one for the training data.

Once we have established 
the best window lengths for the two moving averages 
by trial and error in this way,
we can apply the optimized trading system with the same 8 steps a second time,
this time to the testing data.
The objective of this second application is to ascertain that
the evaluation metric results of the trading system
are similar, within reason, for the training, and for the testing data.
If the evaluation metric results are good for the training data, but
are bad for the testing data,
the trading system is not working, and
needs to be redesigned.

So far we have shown the steps of a trading system when
using percent returns.
But there are many reasons for preferring the use of log returns instead, which
we have already mentioned in the first lesson of this course.
For your final project,
you will need to know how to carry out the 8 steps of the trading system
using log returns.
So the worksheet entitled 'Trading Log Returns' shows you how to do this.
Again all the financial formulas in this particular worksheet 
can be found in the worksheet Formulas of the spreadsheet Returns.xlsx; 
specifically, you need to be looking at the column where log-returns are discussed,
which is column C of this worksheet.

The evaluation metrics when using percent returns are not the same as 
the evaluation metrics when using log returns.
When comparing trading systems, 
be consistent:
compare trading systems that are calculated using log returns with each other,
compare trading systems that are calculated using percent returns with each other,
or 
if you need to compare heterogeneous trading systems,
convert the log returns to percent returns 
before calculating the evaluation metrics
by applying the formula C36 in the worksheet Formulas of the spreadsheet Returns.xlsx.
The formula says:
percent return 
equals the anti-natural-log function (i.e. the exponential function) 
applied to the log returns, and, then,
subtracting 1.





</prosody>
</speak>









